PMS. I still can't remember first learning about Pre-Menstrual Symptoms as a child. I don't remember the specific event, but the understand conveyed. I imagine it went something like this: "My Mom was really grouchy this morning." - "Oh, she probably has PMS." - "Is that a disease?" - "Nah, it's something that happens to Moms once a month. They get really grouchy and you should just leave them alone."

My teen years didn't do much to broaden my understanding. It was eventually apparent that menstruation affected all women - not just Moms - and that the process began just as my own pre-teen body was thrown into fits and starts of its own. I learned the basics of female anatomy from Health class and Sex Ed, but even as a young adult, I mentally associated menstruation with violent and seemingly illogical mood swings. I began to see it as a physiological phenomenon and the cause of complex mental/physical interactions not clearly understood by either those affected or the field of neuroscience. As with so many other subjects, I didn't really learn the *true* basics of menstruation and female anatomy until I observed them first-hand. Direct experience (or, in this case, as direct experience as is possible for males) always trumps even the deepest theoretical and intellectual understanding .

My first girlfiend in college suffered from menstrual cramps. The phrase "suffered from" has watered itself down over the ages to mean "affected by". While my intention is not to exclude that interpretation, I must be explicit about the distinct imagery I hope to convey: When she had cramps, she *suffered*. This specific brand of suffering is an intense physical pain that leaves a person clenched in a ball, rolling on the floor, begging for deliverance.

The first time I saw this my childish ignorance about menstruation was obliterated. This process was genuine, visceral, horrible, and routine. My childish attitude toward the "problem" has taken the intervening decades to correct. As an 18-year-old, I thought my job was to be company and support during these painful episodes. While some women may desire this of their friends and spouses, I 've found (in my limited anecdotal experience) that most just want to be left alone until the feeling passes. It's physically unpleasant, it can be embarassing, and little can be done about the situation but wait for it to resolve itself.

Which brings us to the workday. If you are a man, or a woman who does not experience menstrual cramps, imagine fighting through a workday (or two) with a searing pain emanating from within the depths of your body. Now imagine that you are acutely aware of the source of pain but it's not a social norm to annouce such sorts of things: if you want relief from this, your only option is a generic "sick day", which are doled out in finite number by your employer.

Now imagine you are presented with this day of torture and this lose-lose decision *every month*.

At nilenso (and everywhere, I hope), the solution is clear. First, destroy any childish taboo or squeamishness about menstruation and menstrual cramps: this is simply a fact of life we must all be comfortable with given the limitations of our human biology. Then, dedicate optional days to this event every month. If someone sends a note in the morning: "I have cramps." the team knows she's unreachable for tha day. That's it. No sick days, no fighting through a day of pain at the office, and no unneccesarily burdensome decision.

We look forward to a day when this policy is so well understood and so commonplace it need not even be written down. But given that this hasn't even always been an explicit policy at nilenso (and we like to think of ourselves as relatively progrressive), we realize there is still much work to be done.

Many thanks to the women on our team. Your openness is the only thing that makes this shared understanding possible.
